The basic communication model of DDS is one of unidirectional data exchange where the applications that publish data
“push” the relevant data updates to the local caches of co-located subscribers to the data. This information flow is
regulated by QoS contracts implicitly established between the DataWriters and the DataReaders. The DataWriter specifies
its QoS contract at the time it declares its intent to publish data and the DataReader does it at the time it declares its intent
to subscribe to data. The communication patterns typically include many-to-many style configurations. Of primary 
6 DDS Interoperability Protocol, v2.1
concern to applications deploying DDS technology is that the information is distributed in an efficient manner with
minimal overhead. Another important requirement is the need to scale to hundreds or thousands of subscribers in a robust
fault-tolerant manner.
The DDS specification prescribes the presence of a built-in discovery service that allows publishers to dynamically
discover the existence of subscribers and vice-versa and performs this task continuously without the need to contact any
name servers.
The DDS specification also prescribes that the implementations should not introduce any single points of failure.
Consequently protocols must not rely on centralized name servers or centralized information brokers.
The large scale, loosely-coupled, dynamic nature of applications deploying DDS and the need to adapt to emerging
transports require certain flexibility on the data-definition and protocol such that each can be evolved while preserving
backwards compatibility with already deployed systems. 

The Real-Time Publish Subscribe (RTPS) protocol found its roots in industrial automation and was in fact approved by
the IEC as part of the Real-Time Industrial Ethernet Suite IEC-PAS-62030. It is a field proven technology that is currently
deployed worldwide in thousands of industrial devices.
RTPS was specifically developed to support the unique requirements of data-distributions systems. As one of the
application domains targeted by DDS, the industrial automation community defined requirements for a standard publishsubscribe
wire-protocol that closely match those of DDS. As a direct result, a close synergy exists between DDS and the
RTPS wire-protocol, both in terms of the underlying behavioral architecture and the features of RTPS.
The RTPS protocol is designed to be able to run over multicast and connectionless best-effort transports such as UDP/IP.
The main features of the RTPS protocol include:
• Performance and quality-of-service properties to enable best-effort and reliable publish-subscribe communications for
real-time applications over standard IP networks.
• Fault tolerance to allow the creation of networks without single points of failure.
• Extensibility to allow the protocol to be extended and enhanced with new services without breaking backwards
compatibility and interoperability.
• Plug-and-play connectivity so that new applications and services are automatically discovered and applications can join
and leave the network at any time without the need for reconfiguration.
• Configurability to allow balancing the requirements for reliability and timeliness for each data delivery.
• Modularity to allow simple devices to implement a subset of the protocol and still participate in the network.
• Scalability to enable systems to potentially scale to very large networks.
• Type-safety to prevent application programming errors from compromising the operation of remote nodes.
The above features make RTPS an excellent match for a DDS wire-protocol. Given its publish-subscribe roots, this is not
a coincidence, as RTPS was specifically designed for meeting the types of requirements set forth by the DDS application
domain.
